This is Chapter 1






  How can I, in the battle, shoot with shafts
  On Bhishma, or on Drona-O thou Chief!--
  Both worshipful, both honourable men?

  Better to live on beggar's bread
    With those we love alive,
  Than taste their blood in rich feasts spread,
    And guiltily survive!
  Ah! were it worse-who knows?--to be
    Victor or vanquished here,
  When those confront us angrily
    Whose death leaves living drear?
  In pity lost, by doubtings tossed,
    My thoughts-distracted-turn
  To Thee, the Guide I reverence most,
    That I may counsel learn:
  I know not what would heal the grief
    Burned into soul and sense,
  If I were earth's unchallenged chief--
    A god--and these gone thence!

  






  What is his mark who hath that steadfast heart,
  Confirmed in holy meditation? How
  Know we his speech, Kesava? Sits he, moves he
  Like other men?

  





This is Chapter 2






  Thou whom all mortals praise, Janardana!
  If meditation be a nobler thing
  Than action, wherefore, then, great Kesava!
  Dost thou impel me to this dreadful fight?
  Now am I by thy doubtful speech disturbed!
  Tell me one thing, and tell me certainly;
  By what road shall I find the better end?

  






  Yet tell me, Teacher! by what force doth man
  Go to his ill, unwilling; as if one
  Pushed him that evil path?

  





This is Chapter 3






  Thy birth, dear Lord, was in these later days,
  And bright Vivaswata's preceded time!
  How shall I comprehend this thing thou sayest,
  "From the beginning it was I who taught?"

  





This is Chapter 4






  Yet, Krishna! at the one time thou dost laud
  Surcease of works, and, at another time,
  Service through work. Of these twain plainly tell
  Which is the better way?

  





This is Chapter 5






  Slayer of Madhu! yet again, this Yog,
  This Peace, derived from equanimity,
  Made known by thee--I see no fixity
  Therein, no rest, because the heart of men
  Is unfixed, Krishna! rash, tumultuous,
  Wilful and strong. It were all one, I think,
  To hold the wayward wind, as tame man's heart.

  






  And what road goeth he who, having faith,
  Fails, Krishna! in the striving; falling back
  From holiness, missing the perfect rule?
  Is he not lost, straying from Brahma's light,
  Like the vain cloud, which floats 'twixt earth and heaven
  When lightning splits it, and it vanisheth?
  Fain would I hear thee answer me herein,
  Since, Krishna! none save thou can clear the doubt.

  





This is Chapter 6





This is Chapter 7






  Who is that BRAHMA? What that Soul of Souls,
  The ADHYATMAN? What, Thou Best of All!
  Thy work, the KARMA? Tell me what it is
  Thou namest ADHIBHUTA? What again
  Means ADHIDAIVA? Yea, and how it comes
  Thou canst be ADHIYAJNA in thy flesh?
  Slayer of Madhu! Further, make me know
  How good men find thee in the hour of death?

  





This is Chapter 8





This is Chapter 9






  Yes! Thou art Parabrahm! The High Abode!
  The Great Purification! Thou art God
  Eternal, All-creating, Holy, First,
  Without beginning! Lord of Lords and Gods!
  Declared by all the Saints--by Narada,
  Vyasa Asita, and Devalas;
  And here Thyself declaring unto me!
  What Thou hast said now know I to be truth,
  O Kesava! that neither gods nor men
  Nor demons comprehend Thy mystery
  Made manifest, Divinest! Thou Thyself
  Thyself alone dost know, Maker Supreme!
  Master of all the living! Lord of Gods!
  King of the Universe! To Thee alone
  Belongs to tell the heavenly excellence
  Of those perfections wherewith Thou dost fill
  These worlds of Thine; Pervading, Immanent!
  How shall I learn, Supremest Mystery!
  To know Thee, though I muse continually?
  Under what form of Thine unnumbered forms
  Mayst Thou be grasped? Ah! yet again recount,
  Clear and complete, Thy great appearances,
  The secrets of Thy Majesty and Might,
  Thou High Delight of Men! Never enough
  Can mine ears drink the Amrit[FN#18] of such words!

  





This is Chapter 10






  This, for my soul's peace, have I heard from Thee,
  The unfolding of the Mystery Supreme
  Named Adhyatman; comprehending which,
  My darkness is dispelled; for now I know--
  O Lotus-eyed![FN#21]--whence is the birth of men,
  And whence their death, and what the majesties
  Of Thine immortal rule. Fain would I see,
  As thou Thyself declar'st it, Sovereign Lord!
  The likeness of that glory of Thy Form
  Wholly revealed. O Thou Divinest One!
  If this can be, if I may bear the sight,
  Make Thyself visible, Lord of all prayers!
  Show me Thy very self, the Eternal God!

  






  Yea! I have seen! I see!
  Lord! all is wrapped in Thee!
  The gods are in Thy glorious frame! the creatures
  Of earth, and heaven, and hell
  In Thy Divine form dwell,
  And in Thy countenance shine all the features

  Of Brahma, sitting lone
  Upon His lotus-throne;
  Of saints and sages, and the serpent races
  Ananta, Vasuki;
  Yea! mightiest Lord! I see
  Thy thousand thousand arms, and breasts, and faces,
  And eyes,--on every side
  Perfect, diversified;
  And nowhere end of Thee, nowhere beginning,
  Nowhere a centre! Shifts--
  Wherever soul's gaze lifts--
  Thy central Self, all-wielding, and all-winning!

  Infinite King! I see
  The anadem on Thee,
  The club, the shell, the discus; see Thee burning
  In beams insufferable,
  Lighting earth, heaven, and hell
  With brilliance blazing, glowing, flashing; turning

  Darkness to dazzling day,
  Look I whichever way;
  Ah, Lord! I worship Thee, the Undivided,
  The Uttermost of thought,
  The Treasure-Palace wrought
  To hold the wealth of the worlds; the Shield provided

  To shelter Virtue's laws;
  The Fount whence Life's stream draws
  All waters of all rivers of all being:
  The One Unborn, Unending:
  Unchanging and Unblending!
  With might and majesty, past thought, past seeing!

  Silver of moon and gold
  Of sun are glories rolled
  From Thy great eyes; Thy visage, beaming tender
  Throughout the stars and skies,
  Doth to warm life surprise
  Thy Universe. The worlds are filled with wonder

  Of Thy perfections! Space
  Star-sprinkled, and void place
  From pole to pole of the Blue, from bound to bound,
  Hath Thee in every spot,
  Thee, Thee!--Where Thou art not,
  O Holy, Marvellous Form! is nowhere found!

  O Mystic, Awful One!
  At sight of Thee, made known,
  The Three Worlds quake; the lower gods draw nigh Thee;
  They fold their palms, and bow
  Body, and breast, and brow,
  And, whispering worship, laud and magnify Thee!

  Rishis and Siddhas cry
  "Hail! Highest Majesty!"
  From sage and singer breaks the hymn of glory
  In dulcet harmony,
  Sounding the praise of Thee;
  While countless companies take up the story,

  Rudras, who ride the storms,
  Th' Adityas' shining forms,
  Vasus and Sadhyas, Viswas, Ushmapas;
  Maruts, and those great Twins
  The heavenly, fair, Aswins,
  Gandharvas, Rakshasas, Siddhas, and Asuras,[FN#22]--

  These see Thee, and revere
  In sudden-stricken fear;
  Yea! the Worlds,--seeing Thee with form stupendous,
  With faces manifold,
  With eyes which all behold,
  Unnumbered eyes, vast arms, members tremendous,

  Flanks, lit with sun and star,
  Feet planted near and far,
  Tushes of terror, mouths wrathful and tender;--
  The Three wide Worlds before Thee
  Adore, as I adore Thee,
  Quake, as I quake, to witness so much splendour!

  I mark Thee strike the skies
  With front, in wondrous wise
  Huge, rainbow-painted, glittering; and thy mouth
  Opened, and orbs which see
  All things, whatever be
  In all Thy worlds, east, west, and north and south.

  O Eyes of God! O Head!
  My strength of soul is fled,
  Gone is heart's force, rebuked is mind's desire!
  When I behold Thee so,
  With awful brows a-glow,
  With burning glance, and lips lighted by fire

  Fierce as those flames which shall
  Consume, at close of all,
  Earth, Heaven! Ah me! I see no Earth and Heaven!
  Thee, Lord of Lords! I see,
  Thee only-only Thee!
  Now let Thy mercy unto me be given,

  Thou Refuge of the World!
  Lo! to the cavern hurled
  Of Thy wide-opened throat, and lips white-tushed,
  I see our noblest ones,
  Great Dhritarashtra's sons,
  Bhishma, Drona, and Karna, caught and crushed!

  The Kings and Chiefs drawn in,
  That gaping gorge within;
  The best of both these armies torn and riven!
  Between Thy jaws they lie
  Mangled full bloodily,
  Ground into dust and death! Like streams down-driven

  With helpless haste, which go
  In headlong furious flow
  Straight to the gulfing deeps of th' unfilled ocean,
  So to that flaming cave
  Those heroes great and brave
  Pour, in unending streams, with helpless motion!

  Like moths which in the night
  Flutter towards a light,
  Drawn to their fiery doom, flying and dying,
  So to their death still throng,
  Blind, dazzled, borne along
  Ceaselessly, all those multitudes, wild flying!

  Thou, that hast fashioned men,
  Devourest them again,
  One with another, great and small, alike!
  The creatures whom Thou mak'st,
  With flaming jaws Thou tak'st,
  Lapping them up! Lord God! Thy terrors strike

  From end to end of earth,
  Filling life full, from birth
  To death, with deadly, burning, lurid dread!
  Ah, Vishnu! make me know
  Why is Thy visage so?
  Who art Thou, feasting thus upon Thy dead?

  Who? awful Deity!
  I bow myself to Thee,
  Namostu Te, Devavara! Prasid![FN#23]
  O Mightiest Lord! rehearse
  Why hast Thou face so fierce?
  Whence doth this aspect horrible proceed?

  






  Worthily, Lord of Might!
  The whole world hath delight
  In Thy surpassing power, obeying Thee;
  The Rakshasas, in dread
  At sight of Thee, are sped
  To all four quarters; and the company

  Of Siddhas sound Thy name.
  How should they not proclaim
  Thy Majesties, Divinest, Mightiest?
  Thou Brahm, than Brahma greater!
  Thou Infinite Creator!
  Thou God of gods, Life's Dwelling-place and Rest!

  Thou, of all souls the Soul!
  The Comprehending Whole!
  Of being formed, and formless being the Framer;
  O Utmost One! O Lord!
  Older than eld, Who stored
  The worlds with wealth of life! O Treasure-Claimer,

  Who wottest all, and art
  Wisdom Thyself! O Part
  In all, and All; for all from Thee have risen
  Numberless now I see
  The aspects are of Thee!
  Vayu[FN#24] Thou art, and He who keeps the prison

  Of Narak, Yama dark;
  And Agni's shining spark;
  Varuna's waves are Thy waves. Moon and starlight
  Are Thine! Prajapati
  Art Thou, and 'tis to Thee
  They knelt in worshipping the old world's far light,

  The first of mortal men.
  Again, Thou God! again
  A thousand thousand times be magnified!
  Honour and worship be--
  Glory and praise,--to Thee
  Namo, Namaste, cried on every side;

  Cried here, above, below,
  Uttered when Thou dost go,
  Uttered where Thou dost come! Namo! we call;
  Namostu! God adored!
  Namostu! Nameless Lord!
  Hail to Thee! Praise to Thee! Thou One in all;

  For Thou art All! Yea, Thou!
  Ah! if in anger now
  Thou shouldst remember I did think Thee Friend,
  Speaking with easy speech,
  As men use each to each;
  Did call Thee "Krishna," "Prince," nor comprehend

  Thy hidden majesty,
  The might, the awe of Thee;
  Did, in my heedlessness, or in my love,
  On journey, or in jest,
  Or when we lay at rest,
  Sitting at council, straying in the grove,

  Alone, or in the throng,
  Do Thee, most Holy! wrong,
  Be Thy grace granted for that witless sin!
  For Thou art, now I know,
  Father of all below,
  Of all above, of all the worlds within

  Guru of Gurus; more
  To reverence and adore
  Than all which is adorable and high!
  How, in the wide worlds three
  Should any equal be?
  Should any other share Thy Majesty?

  Therefore, with body bent
  And reverent intent,
  I praise, and serve, and seek Thee, asking grace.
  As father to a son,
  As friend to friend, as one
  Who loveth to his lover, turn Thy face

  In gentleness on me!
  Good is it I did see
  This unknown marvel of Thy Form! But fear
  Mingles with joy! Retake,
  Dear Lord! for pity's sake
  Thine earthly shape, which earthly eyes may bear!

  Be merciful, and show
  The visage that I know;
  Let me regard Thee, as of yore, arrayed
  With disc and forehead-gem,
  With mace and anadem,
  Thou that sustainest all things! Undismayed

  Let me once more behold
  The form I loved of old,
  Thou of the thousand arms and countless eyes!
  This frightened heart is fain
  To see restored again
  My Charioteer, in Krishna's kind disguise.

  






  Now that I see come back, Janardana!
  This friendly human frame, my mind can think
  Calm thoughts once more; my heart beats still again!

  





This is Chapter 11






  Lord! of the men who serve Thee--true in heart--
  As God revealed; and of the men who serve,
  Worshipping Thee Unrevealed, Unbodied, Far,
  Which take the better way of faith and life?

  





This is Chapter 12






  Now would I hear, O gracious Kesava![FN#26]
  Of Life which seems, and Soul beyond, which sees,
  And what it is we know-or think to know.

  





This is Chapter 13






  Oh, my Lord!
  Which be the signs to know him that hath gone
  Past the Three Modes? How liveth he? What way
  Leadeth him safe beyond the threefold Modes?

  





This is Chapter 14





This is Chapter 15





This is Chapter 16






  If men forsake the holy ordinance,
  Heedless of Shastras, yet keep faith at heart
  And worship, what shall be the state of those,
  Great Krishna! Sattwan, Rajas, Tamas? Say!

  





This is Chapter 17






  Fain would I better know, Thou Glorious One!
  The very truth--Heart's Lord!--of Sannyas,
  Abstention; and  enunciation, Lord!
  Tyaga; and what separates these twain!

  






  Trouble and ignorance are gone! the Light
  Hath come unto me, by Thy favour, Lord!
  Now am I fixed! my doubt is fled away!
  According to Thy word, so will I do!

  






  Lord! of the men who serve Thee--true in heart--
  As God revealed; and of the men who serve,
  Worshipping Thee Unrevealed, Unbodied, Far,
  Which take the better way of faith and life?

  






  Now would I hear, O gracious Kesava![FN#26]
  Of Life which seems, and Soul beyond, which sees,
  And what it is we know-or think to know.

  






  Oh, my Lord!
  Which be the signs to know him that hath gone
  Past the Three Modes? How liveth he? What way
  Leadeth him safe beyond the threefold Modes?

  






  If men forsake the holy ordinance,
  Heedless of Shastras, yet keep faith at heart
  And worship, what shall be the state of those,
  Great Krishna! Sattwan, Rajas, Tamas? Say!

  






  Fain would I better know, Thou Glorious One!
  The very truth--Heart's Lord!--of Sannyas,
  Abstention; and  enunciation, Lord!
  Tyaga; and what separates these twain!

  






  Trouble and ignorance are gone! the Light
  Hath come unto me, by Thy favour, Lord!
  Now am I fixed! my doubt is fled away!
  According to Thy word, so will I do!

  





